SQL-user-defined-functions (#1288)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: articles/sql-user-defined-functions/index.md

# Working With User-Defined Functions In SQL Server

  

In this tutorial, we will be discussing user-defined functions in SQL Server. More specifically, we will be discussing Scalar Functions and Table-Valued Functions.

When writing code, one must aim to follow the DRY Principle (Don’t Repeat Yourself). One way to avoid repetition of code is to put chunks of code inside Functions and invoke them as required.

> The concept of Functions in SQL is like that in any other programming language like Python. The major difference being the way they are implemented. There are two main types of user-defined functions in SQL based on the data they return

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The concept of functions in SQL is similar to other programming languages like Python. The major difference being the way they are implemented. There are two main types of user-defined functions in SQL based on the data they return:
```

  

- **Scalar Functions-** These types of Functions return a single value, i.e float, int, varchar, datetime, etc

- **Table-Valued Functions-** These Functions return tables

  

### Table of contents

- Prerequisites

- Creating Functions

- Using Functions in Statements

- Update/Delete Functions

- Using Variables, Conditional Statements inside Functions

- Conclusion

  

### Prerequisites

  

- A basic understanding of SQL

  

- A SQL Server with a database

> - [SQL Server Management Studio](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/ssms/download-sql-server-management-studio-ssms?view=sql-server-ver15) to connect to your database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [SQL Server Management Studio](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/ssms/download-sql-server-management-studio-ssms?view=sql-server-ver15) to connect to your database
```

It is good practice to use periods `.` consistently.

---

### Creating Functions

#### Scalar Functions

> Below is the definition of a simple Function. It takes in two numbers and returns their sum. Since this function returns a number, it is a scalar function.

Reviewer: > Below is the definition of a simple Function. 

Please change the **f** in Function to lowercase in all instances

```sql

>     CREATE FUNCTION scalar_func

Reviewer: It would be beneficial to beginners if you could add code comments for all the code that you've used in this article.

    (
	    @a AS INT,
	    @b AS INT
    )
    RETURNS INT
    AS
    BEGIN
	    RETURN @a + @b

>     END

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    END;
```

It is a good practice to include a semi-colon at the end of an SQL statement. (Although it isn't compulsory in SQL Server)

```

> - We use the **Create Function** command to define Functions. It is followed by the name of the function. In the above example, the name of the function is **scalar_func**.

Reviewer: Please include function names within backticks.

```suggestion
- We use the **Create Function** command to define Functions. It is followed by the name of the function. In the above example, the name of the function is `scalar_func`.
```

- We need to declare the parameters of the function in the following format

    ```@VariableName AS Data Type```

>    In our above example, we have defined two Integer parameters **a** and **b**.

Reviewer: Please include param names also in backticks.

```suggestion
In our above example, we have defined two Integer parameters `a` and `b`.
```

- The return type of the result has to be mentioned below the definition of the parameters. In the above example, we are returning the sum which is an Integer.

- After the return statements, we create a **BEGIN ... END** block which contains the logic of our function. Although in this case, since we have a single return statement, we don't require a **BEGIN ... END** block

  

#### Table-Valued Functions

Before creating a table-valued function, we will create a simple table.

  
```sql
    CREATE TABLE TEST(
	    num1 INT,
	    num2 INT

>     )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    );
```

    
    INSERT INTO TEST
    VALUES
    (1,2),
    (2,3),

>     (4,5)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	    (4,5);
```

```
The table contains 2 columns. We will create a function which returns a new table with an extra column. This extra column will contain the sum of numbers in the column **num1** and column **num2**.

  
```sql
    CREATE FUNCTION table_valued_func()
    RETURNS TABLE
    AS
    RETURN
	    SELECT num1 , num2, num1 + num2 AS 'SUM'

> 	    FROM TEST

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	    FROM TEST;
```

```
- The above function does not take in any parameter.

- The SQL statement simply calculates the sum and stores it in a new column named **SUM**

---

### Using Functions in Statement

#### Scalar Functions
```sql
    SELECT dbo.scalar_func(1,2);
```
When using functions in statements, we will need to prefix our functions with the database schema it is associated with. The default schema in Microsoft SQL Server is **dbo**. If the database schema is not mentioned, SQL will give an error,

#### Table-Valued Functions

Since the function returns a table, we will need to select the columns we are interested in.
```sql
    SELECT * FROM dbo.table_valued_func();
```
Like scalar functions, we will need to mention the database schema.

  

---

### Update/Delete Functions

The syntax to update/delete scalar and table-valued functions are the same.

  

#### Update

We will update our table-valued function to add 10 to the existing sum and change the name of the column to **New_Sum**
```sql
    ALTER FUNCTION table_valued_func()
    RETURNS TABLE
    AS
    RETURN
	    SELECT num1 , num2, num1 + num2 + 10 AS 'NEW_SUM'

> 	    FROM TEST

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		    FROM TEST;
```

```

> The **Alter** Keyword is used to update the function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Alter** keyword is used to update the function.
```

  

#### Drop
```sql

>     DROP FUNCTION dbo.scalar_func

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    DROP FUNCTION dbo.scalar_func;
```

>     DROP FUNCTION dbo.table_valued_func

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    DROP FUNCTION dbo.table_valued_func;
```

 ```   
> Note: Do not put parenthesis after the function name

-----

### Using Variables, Conditional Statements inside Functions

#### Variables

Below is the syntax to declare and initialize variables
```sql

>     DECLARE @result AS INT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    DECLARE @result AS INT;
```

>     SET @result = @a + @b

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    SET @result = @a + @b;
```

```

> The **DECLARE** Keyword is used to create a variable and the **SET** Keyword is used to initialize a variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **DECLARE** keyword is used to create a variable and the **SET** keyword is used to initialize a variable.
```

The 'k' in keyword has to be in lowercase.

Below is an example of a scalar function using a variable
```sql
    CREATE FUNCTION scalar_func
    (
	    @a AS INT,
	    @b AS INT
    )
    RETURNS INT
    AS
    BEGIN
	    DECLARE @result AS INT
	    SET @result = @a + @b
	    RETURN @a + @b

>     END

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    END;
```

```

#### IF...ELSE Statements

The syntax for IF...ELSE Statements is like IF...ELSE Statements in Python or C++
```sql

>     DECLARE @num AS INT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    DECLARE @num AS INT;
```

    SET @num = 4
    IF @num % 2 = 0    
	    BEGIN
		    SELECT 'Number is Even'
	    END
    ELSE
	    BEGIN
		    SELECT 'Number is Odd'
	    END
```
The above piece of code checks whether the value in variable **num** is even or odd. Based on the value, the **IF** or the **ELSE** Block is executed.

Below is a function using an **IF...ELSE** Block

```sql

>     CREATE FUNCTION is_even(@num AS INT)

Reviewer: Please add semi-colons at the appropriate places.

    RETURNS BIT
    AS
    BEGIN
	    DECLARE @result AS BIT
	    IF @num % 2 = 0
		    SET @result = 1
	    ELSE
		    SET @result = 0
	    RETURN @result
    END
```

#### Case Statements

> When you are dealing mith multiple if statements, it is better to use case statements. They make your code easier to read. Below is the general syntax for Case Statements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you are dealing with multiple if statements, it is better to use case statements. They make your code easier to read. Below is the general syntax for Case Statements
```
